No one notices the figure at the window, 
just a shape, a shadow, an outline. 
Floors below, across the street, in the park, children! 
Their shouts and giggles, echoing up through the court yard. 
It pulls at him, the sounds of innocents; setting his teeth to chatter.
The girls moved on toward the pavilion, 
one girl lags behind. 
Pauses to sit on the stone wall. 
She watches the others recede down the street then vanish into the glass-enclosed winter-garden. 
She kicks at the grass just below her feet.
The wall is just high enough for her feet to dangle. 
More children emerge from the school and they too pass the girl sitting on the
wall. Taking no notice of her. She isn't part of their click. 
The girl on the wall is no more important than the stones that make up the
wall. 
It's okay, she knows how to be on her own doesn't need to be part of anything.
She will just sit on the wall until it's time to go. 
The sun drops behind the buildings, and the last of the children exit the school 
and those that live way across town get on the last yellow bus. 
The bus pulls away and the girl jumps down from the wall and walks in the
opposite direction toward the park that boarders the river. The traffic on the
Westside Highway begins to congest. The girl makes her way down the steps into
the park. The river water is choppy and there is a breeze not evident
elsewhere but by the water out from the safety of the buildings that block
it's westerly thrusts.   
A runner jogs past the girl. She goes to the railing to look closer at the
rocks that are exposed. She watches the waves wet the sides of the rocks. The
tide could be coming in or going out. Only by watching the rocks can she tell
for sure. When the waves crash over the tops of the rocks she can conclude
that the tide is coming in.
"Tide will be extra high tonight." Says a voice. 
The girl startles. 
"Sorry," says the voice, "I didn't mean to freak you." 
Eyes wide, the girl looks up at the owner of the voice. It's an adult. A man
older than her assuredly, but not as old as Mr. Farley her sixth period math
teacher who must be forty. This man is much younger, but yet older than the
seniors some of whom are as tall as the man but they are softer with bits of boy on them. 
This man has some of that, but less, as if it has been leaking out of him bit by bit. 
The girl thinks that she shouldn't be talking with him. She has been told not to talk to strangers. But he not that strange, just older than what she's used to. She turns toward the river and begins to walk, the man falls into step with her and they are walking together though she has not invited him to accompany her, the man has invited himself. But she is not angry at this intrusion into her solitude she is almost happy for the company. Though she likes to pride herself on how she doesn't "need" friends or other people. She must admit to herself that having someone listen to you is nice for a change. Mostly people are not listening, like when she raises her hand in class and Mr. Farley looks past her to one the boys and seems so exited if the answer coming out of them is even halfway right, where as when she gives the right answer on that rare occasion when nobody but her raises their hand and she give the correct answer and Mr. Farley in that stupid corduroy jacket with the patches at the elbow, as if this were a college and he was professer, not some jerk off math teacher in a Highs School. She dreads the idea that someday she will be as old as him and dressing like she doesn't know what decade it is. 
She wants to curse at them when they get like that but then they know that they've got to her. It seems to work better if it doesn't look like she cares, even though she does care, and sometimes very much but there is nothing that she can do about it because it's like that huge bolder in the park that can't be moved no matter how many hands are there to push against it's mass. It's inert like her social position. 
