			-  I-5  - 

4am, the median, below the I-5 in his Crown-Vic’ Trooper Malory
his face illuminated, blue, by dashboard light. 

Outside the wind draws up angry, sudden. A sound of metal ripping, t e a r i n g, 
an engine races to scream, wood shatters as if struck by canon fire.

Malory leaves his perch on the median lights & siren going. 
His Heart pulsing behind his eyes, he approaches slow; 

so as to avoid running over the injured? More likely 
it's his dullness of mind, from three drafts at the Skyway Grill.

One beer, “okay” but his shoulder ached; the tingle running down his arm.  
If only Wayne, the counter guy, hadn’t kept refilling his damn mug.

He wills himself, to think, to push on through the mental cloud bank and 
“preceded to the North side of 390, where it crosses I-5 under the Skyway. . .  " 

An oak sheared in two; beneath it, the “probable” remains 
of a vehicle pulled apart into toffee-like strands. 

All his seconds balloon to minutes; he trundles out of the car 
to climb the embankment to the disemboweled wreckage. 

In the stillness, the steam tick-tick-tick of liquid on a hot exhaust. 
What can’t be in Trooper Marlowe’s report but should be:

the time taken to find “the mother,” in tall grass convulsing, 
limbs expanding, mouth open blood-frothing; 

inches above her open eyes; her head top, gone. He looks down into sightless eyes, 
she's looking through past him; he strains to picture the sequence 

of events that put her at his feet. Over his shoulder, 
a girl, (or the “sense” of a girl) floating above, looking down. 

He looks up, to see only winter night stars.
He Leaves the woman in the tall grass, goes back to the wreckage 

looks around, looks underneath, looks within.
Beneath the car-roof curled like a blanket, 

the remaining occupant, evidenced by 
a blood soaked knit cap with raccoon ears. 

A hand emerges from under the blanket of metal, 
a child's hand, small, open, extending to him.

He touches the palm, feels it's warmth.
The little hand closes around his finger.
