She sits forward on the sofa, 
    as if ready to spring to her feet and leave. 
    "I shouldn't have to be here." she says. 

"No one should have to be anywhere," says the man who sits opposite, 
"but sometimes...." he trails off, not finishing his sentence.
He's a man dressed for a casual interview. 
Solitary gray hairs are perceptible in his close cut beard. 
His chair, an office chair, comfortable but for work at a desk.
He has wheeled it away from the desk 
to set directly opposite the girl perched on the sofa. 

"I was fine before this," she says, and digs at the cuticle on her thumb with her middle finger. A redness is developing there, close to becoming an open wound.
She looks down at her finger. 

He does also. 

"I used to not do this either." She turns her right hand to better show her thumb wound. 

"I'm sure," he says "we're always fine until we aren't. Then with time...."
Again he trails off, 
the tone, meant for comfort, 
but could just as easily be 
patronizing. 

"No I mean it. My grades were perfect. I used to be able to figure things out ..." she seeks more words but they are no longer available to her.

He nods, leans forward, uncrosses his legs; 
his pad of paper almost slips from his lap 
but he catches it without breaking eye contact.
"She was a friend?" He questions, but more like a statement just in need of conformation. 
 

A pained look gathers in the young womans eyes and is then pushed back. 
She nods and looks down at the carpet, a floral patterned throw rug a top a bare wood floor.

"Shanie, why don't you begin from before your friend went missing, before she went to the group home if you want."

The girl settles into something of a repose on the sofa and says 
"She was the more out going of the two of us, if you can believe that." 
The first hint a smile arrives on the young woman's face; 
she having kicked off her shoes, pulls her legs up under her skirt.
"Carrie-Anne," She utters the name with care, 
"I think she was named after a song, her mom liked."       

  
